---
title: "X-Sketchbook - Publishing and Place"
date: 2021-02-05 15:00:00 +0100
categories: call
image: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/TIBHannover/xsketch/main/images/semantic-publishing.jpg
vertical: Code
excerpt: " "
---

*architectural design practice and the sketchbook of the future*

05 Feb 2021

\#xsketch \#sempub \| <https://github.com/TIBHannover/xsketch> \|
<simon.worthington@tib.eu>

**Partners:** Open Science Lab, TIB – Leibniz Information Centre for Science and
Technology (lead), The Bartlett School of Architecture, Hochschule Hannover, and
the Community-led Open Publishing Infrastructures for Monographs (COPIM)
project.

**Editors:** Simon Worthington, Ina Blümel, and Lambert Heller, TIB. Ava Fatah,
The Bartlett.

**What is X-Sketchbook?** It’s a book! It’s an experimental workflow! Released
in sections during ʼ21, this publication will be a view on the state of the art
of experimentation in architectural publishing. The publication will be realised
in the context of architectural cultural infrastructural research at TIB for the
‘Consortium for Research Data on Material and Immaterial Cultural Heritage’
([NFDI4Culture](https://nfdi4culture.de/)).

**Experimental workflow?** In studio practice architects are using diverse
digital objects from multiple locations in their design sketches. We are using
Open Science data tools to help capture and store these objects, assign them
persistent identifiers, and then package them as a book – aimed at reuse.

TIB has an existing workflow using the software Fidus Writer and Jupyter Books
(Notebooks). The proposed workflow gives the architect a way to output the book
as a multi-format publication, combining both born-digital and post-digital
formats – from Jupyter Notebooks to riso-print.

## Book content and process

**Content:** The focus of this research and publishing project is to look at
innovations in design and publishing practice for the field of architecture that
have been brought about by the challenges of using online platforms and social
media. Questions of interest are also the new contexts of urbanism, data
sovereignty, and reinterpretation of place. Distinct book sections would be
created around these topics.

In architectural design practice we will be comparing and contrasting existing
practices and experimental design informed by using new digital creative
affordances, such as – robotics, sensory interfaces, 3D printing, 3D
visualisations, real time data simulations, or photogrammetry.

**Process:** Our research method will use book sprints, which are goal oriented
‘hot house’ work sessions where challenges are posed and the participants have
to create a finished ‘book or book section’ at the end of the sprint. The
research project includes a hybridized version of book sprints where Jupyter
Books (Notebooks) is used – existing open technology – that allows for more
advanced types of complex digital objects, using 3D visualisations, real time
data simulations, or plans for 3D printing, etc.

**COPIM**: The [COPIM](https://www.copim.ac.uk/) project will assist both the
authors and publisher involved in this project to adapt their workflows to
accommodate the proposed experimental workflow. They will provide technical
assistance and will document the process as part of one of their Pilot Cases,
which serve as inspiration to authors and publishers and aim to promote
experimental book publishing.

**Invitation to participate:** Members of the architectural and urbanism
publishing community will be invited to take part in short sprints to produce
book sections, which will be curated by the editorial team. What is on offer is
a technical way to assign PIDs to social media and archive content – with
features such as automatic rights clearance as well as multi-format typesetting
and website generation. No financial contribution is required from partners. The
project will tap into the infrastructures and frameworks available from the
[NFDI4Culture](https://nfdi4culture.de/) cultural infrastructures project which
is made up of Germany’s largest institution in the GLAM sector as well as
academic societies.

DOI: <https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4506467>

© 2021 the authors. Creative Commons: Attribution-ShareAlike 4.0 International
(CC BY-SA 4.0) <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/>
